.\" skiplist.7 -- conceptual overview of the skiplist library
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC OR MIT
.\" Copyright (c) 2024-2026 Gregory Burd <greg@burd.me>
.\"
.TH SKIPLIST 7 "May 2026" "skiplist 1.0" "Miscellaneous Information Manual"
.SH NAME
skiplist \- header-only C splay-list with lock-free concurrency
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B skiplist
is a header-only C library that implements a probabilistic
sorted-list data structure with logarithmic expected lookup time.
Unlike a balanced binary tree, a skiplist achieves balance
probabilistically: each node has a randomly chosen
.I height
that determines how many of its forward pointers participate in
the upper-level shortcuts.
.PP
The implementation in
.B skiplist
adds two extensions to the basic algorithm:
.TP
\fBLock-free concurrency\fR
The default mode supports multiple concurrent readers and writers
using the Fraser/Harris algorithm with marked pointers for logical
deletion and epoch-based reclamation (EBR) for safe memory reuse.
.TP
\fBSplay rebalancing\fR (opt-in)
When enabled at compile time via
.B SKIPLIST_SPLAY_REBALANCE,
node heights adapt to the observed access distribution: hot keys
are promoted toward the head, cold keys are demoted.  A node hit
with frequency p settles at depth log2(1/p) below the head, the
information-theoretic optimum for search cost (Aksenov, Alistarh,
Drozdova, Mohtashami, "The Splay-List", 2020).  Verified empirically
by
.B tests/test_splay_verify.c
across hit ratios from p=1.0 down to p=0.005.
.SH "DATA STRUCTURE"
A skiplist is a singly- or doubly-linked sorted list where some
nodes also carry forward pointers at higher
.IR levels .
A search begins at the head sentinel at the highest level and
descends, following forward pointers as long as the next key is
less than or equal to the target.  In
.B skiplist
the level-0 list is doubly linked, so reverse iteration is O(1)
per step.
.PP
Each node carries an array of
.B {next, hits}
pairs, one entry per active level.  The
.B hits
counter on each level drives the optional splay rebalancing pass.
The library reserves head and tail
.I sentinel
nodes at every level so the lookup, insert, and remove paths
never have to special-case the boundaries.
.SH "GENERATED CODE MODEL"
The entire implementation lives in preprocessor macros that
generate type-specific code at compile time, similar to C++
templates.  Users include a single header,
.BR sl.h ,
embed
.B SKIPLIST_ENTRY
in their node structure, and invoke
.B SKIPLIST_DECL
to generate a family of functions named
.IB prefix _skip_ operation _ decl ().
The preprocessor approach is verbose to read but eliminates the
runtime cost of indirect function dispatch that a plain-C
implementation would otherwise require.
.PP
Users who want only basic ordered-set operations include
.BR sl.h ,
invoke
.BR SKIPLIST_ENTRY ,
and
.BR SKIPLIST_DECL .
Additional macros layer optional features on top:
.TP
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_ACCESS
High-level key/value API (\fBget\fR, \fBput\fR, \fBdel\fR,
\fBcontains\fR, ...)
.TP
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_SNAPSHOTS
MVCC point-in-time snapshots with restore
.TP
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_EBR
Epoch-based reclamation for concurrent memory safety
.TP
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_POOL
Cache-line-aligned fixed-capacity pool allocator
.TP
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_ARCHIVE
Binary serialization and deserialization
.TP
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_VALIDATE
Runtime invariant checking
.TP
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_DOT
GraphViz DOT visualization
.SH "CONCURRENCY MODEL"
The default build supports lock-free insert, search, and remove
across multiple threads.  Three correctness ingredients:
.TP
\fBMarked pointers.\fR
The lowest bit of each forward pointer flags a logically-deleted
node.  Readers skip marked nodes; the next writer to traverse the
predecessor unlinks the corpse.
.TP
\fBCompare-and-swap chains.\fR
Inserts splice in bottom-up: a CAS at level 0 establishes
visibility, then upper levels are linked opportunistically.
A failure on level >0 leaves the node reachable but at lower
height.  A subsequent splay-rebalance pass restores the expected
distribution.
.TP
\fBEpoch-based reclamation.\fR
Threads register once with the EBR machinery and pin/unpin around
each operation.  Removed nodes are retired into a per-thread
limbo list and freed only after every registered thread has
visited a fresh epoch.
.PP
For applications that do not need concurrency, defining
.B SKIPLIST_SINGLE_THREADED
before including
.B sl.h
strips all atomic operations.  The dependency on
.B <stdatomic.h>
and
.B <stdalign.h>
is removed; tight insert loops run roughly 30 percent faster
than the lock-free path.
.SH "MEMORY MANAGEMENT"
Nodes are user-allocated.  The library calls a user-supplied
.I free
block to release node-internal resources, then frees the node
storage itself.  Under concurrent mode this happens through EBR;
under single-threaded mode it happens immediately on
.IR remove .
.PP
The optional pool allocator
.RB ( SKIPLIST_DECL_POOL )
provides a fixed-capacity slab with cache-line-aligned slots and
a lock-free free list.  Allocations beyond the configured
capacity fall back to
.BR malloc (3).
For sequential-insert workloads the pool typically improves
throughput by a factor of two to three.
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.B skiplist
is C11 (or C99 with
.BR SKIPLIST_SINGLE_THREADED )
and depends only on the C standard library plus
.B <pthread.h>
in tests and examples.  The header contains portability shims
for atomics, alignment, and process-id retrieval that work on
GCC, Clang, and MSVC.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B include/sl.h
The implementation.  Single header; copy into your project or
install via
.B make install
to obtain
.B <sl.h>
under the system include path.
.TP
.B skiplist.pc
.BR pkg-config (1)
metadata installed alongside the header.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR sl.h (3),
.BR pkg-config (1)
.PP
For architectural rationale (why the macro layer, why the
Fraser/Harris variant, why splay rebalance is gated to read-only
call paths, comparison to B+trees and ART), see
.B DESIGN.md
in the source distribution.
.PP
Project home page:
.UR https://codeberg.org/gregburd/skiplist
.UE
.SH AUTHOR
Gregory Burd <greg@burd.me>
.SH LICENSE
Dual-licensed under ISC OR MIT.  Pick whichever suits.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
File issues at
.UR https://codeberg.org/gregburd/skiplist/issues
.UE .
