.\" sl.h.3 -- API reference for skiplist's macro-based generator
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC OR MIT
.\" Copyright (c) 2024-2026 Gregory Burd <greg@burd.me>
.\"
.TH SL.H 3 "May 2026" "skiplist 1.1" "Library Functions Manual"
.SH NAME
sl.h, SKIPLIST_ENTRY, SKIPLIST_DECL, SKIPLIST_DECL_ACCESS,
SKIPLIST_DECL_SNAPSHOTS, SKIPLIST_DECL_EBR, SKIPLIST_DECL_POOL,
SKIPLIST_DECL_ARCHIVE, SKIPLIST_DECL_VALIDATE, SKIPLIST_DECL_DOT,
SKIPLIST_FOREACH_H2T, SKIPLIST_FOREACH_T2H \-
header-only sorted-list generator with lock-free concurrency
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sl.h>
.PP
.B SKIPLIST_ENTRY(\fIdecl\fB);
.PP
.B SKIPLIST_DECL(\fIdecl\fB, \fIprefix\fB, \fIfield\fB,
.BI "    " cmp_blk ,
.BI "    " free_blk ,
.BI "    " update_blk ,
.BI "    " archive_blk ,
.BI "    " sizeof_blk );
.PP
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_ACCESS(\fIdecl\fB, \fIprefix\fB,
.BI "    " key_field ", " key_type ,
.BI "    " value_field ", " value_type ,
.BI "    " query_blk ", " return_blk );
.PP
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_SNAPSHOTS(\fIdecl\fB, \fIprefix\fB, \fIfield\fB);
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_EBR(\fIdecl\fB, \fIprefix\fB);
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_POOL(\fIdecl\fB, \fIprefix\fB, \fIfield\fB, \fIcapacity_hint\fB);
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_ARCHIVE(\fIdecl\fB, \fIprefix\fB, \fIfield\fB,
.BI "    " write_blk ", " read_blk );
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_VALIDATE(\fIdecl\fB, \fIprefix\fB, \fIfield\fB);
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_DOT(\fIdecl\fB, \fIprefix\fB, \fIfield\fB);
.PP
.B SKIPLIST_FOREACH_H2T(\fIdecl\fB, \fIprefix\fB, \fIfield\fB,
.BI "    " list ", " elm ", " iter );
.B SKIPLIST_FOREACH_T2H(\fIdecl\fB, \fIprefix\fB, \fIfield\fB,
.BI "    " list ", " elm ", " iter );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B sl.h
header generates type-specific skiplist code at compile time.
A user defines a node structure containing a
.B SKIPLIST_ENTRY
member, then invokes
.B SKIPLIST_DECL
once per skiplist type to instantiate the implementation.  The
generator emits a list type
.BI "" decl _t,
a node type
.BI "" decl _node_t,
a position-operator enum
.BI "skip_pos_" decl _t,
and a family of functions named
.IB prefix skip_ operation _ decl ().
.PP
The remaining
.B SKIPLIST_DECL_*
macros are independent feature layers that may be added on top
of the core declaration; each must be invoked after
.B SKIPLIST_DECL
for the same
.I decl
and
.IR prefix .
.SH "CORE: SKIPLIST_DECL"
.SS Arguments
.TP
.I decl
Identifier used to name the generated types
.RB ( "" decl "_t, " decl "_node_t" ).
.TP
.I prefix
Prefix applied to every generated function.
.TP
.I field
Name of the
.B SKIPLIST_ENTRY
member inside the user's node struct.
.TP
.I cmp_blk
Code block evaluating to
.B int
with the visible variables
.BR list ", " a ", " b ", and " aux .
Returns negative if
.IR a < b ,
zero if equal, positive if greater.
.TP
.I free_blk
Code block that releases user resources held by
.BR node .
The library frees the node storage itself; this block must
release only fields owned by the user.
.TP
.I update_blk
Code block that updates an existing
.B node
in place from
.BR value ,
setting
.B rc
to zero on success, non-zero on failure.
.TP
.I archive_blk
Code block that performs a deep copy from
.B src
to
.BR dest ,
setting
.B rc
to zero on success.  Used by
.BR SKIPLIST_DECL_SNAPSHOTS .
.TP
.I sizeof_blk
Code block that sets
.B bytes
to the serialized size of
.BR node ,
used by
.BR SKIPLIST_DECL_ARCHIVE .
.SS "Generated functions"
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_init_" decl "(" decl "_t *list);"
Initialize a freshly-declared list.  Returns 0 on success or
.B ENOMEM
if the sentinel nodes could not be allocated.
.TP
.BI "void " prefix "skip_free_" decl "(" decl "_t *list);"
Free every node and the head/tail sentinels.  The list is
invalid afterwards until re-initialized.  Caller must guarantee
no other thread is operating on the list.
.TP
.BI "void " prefix "skip_release_" decl "(" decl "_t *list);"
Free every node but keep the sentinels, leaving an empty,
reusable list.
.TP
.BI "size_t " prefix "skip_length_" decl "(" decl "_t *list);"
.TQ
.BI "int " prefix "skip_is_empty_" decl "(" decl "_t *list);"
Number of user nodes, and a non-zero/zero emptiness test.
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_alloc_node_" decl "(" decl "_node_t **out);"
Allocate a node via
.BR calloc (3),
storing it through
.BR out .
Returns 0 or
.BR ENOMEM .
.TP
.BI "void " prefix "skip_free_node_" decl "(" decl "_t *list, " decl "_node_t *n);"
Run
.I free_blk
on
.B n
and free its storage.  Under EBR, prefer
.BI prefix skip_ebr_retire_ decl ()
which defers reclamation until safe.
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_insert_" decl "(" decl "_t *list, " decl "_node_t *n);"
Insert
.BR n .
Returns 0 on success, or
.B EEXIST
if a node with the same key already exists.
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_insert_dup_" decl "(" decl "_t *list, " decl "_node_t *n);"
Like
.BR skip_insert_ ,
but allows duplicate keys.
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_remove_node_" decl "(" decl "_t *list, " decl "_node_t *query);"
Locate the node matching
.B query
by key and unlink it.  Returns 0 on success,
.B ENOENT
if no match.  When EBR is attached the node is retired through
the EBR limbo list; otherwise it is freed immediately.
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_update_" decl "(" decl "_t *list, " decl "_node_t *query, void *value);"
Find the node matching
.B query
and apply
.I update_blk
with
.BR value .
Returns 0,
.BR ENOENT ", or " EINVAL .
.TP
.BI "" decl "_node_t *" prefix "skip_position_eq_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, " decl "_node_t *q);"
Node equal to
.BR q ,
or
.BR NULL .
.TP
.BI "" decl "_node_t *" prefix "skip_position_lt_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, " decl "_node_t *q);"
.TQ
.BI "" decl "_node_t *" prefix "skip_position_lte_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, " decl "_node_t *q);"
.TQ
.BI "" decl "_node_t *" prefix "skip_position_gt_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, " decl "_node_t *q);"
.TQ
.BI "" decl "_node_t *" prefix "skip_position_gte_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, " decl "_node_t *q);"
Last node strictly less than, last node less than or equal to,
first node strictly greater than, and first node greater than
or equal to
.BR q .
Each returns
.B NULL
when no such node exists.
.TP
.BI "" decl "_node_t *" prefix "skip_position_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, skip_pos_" decl "_t op, " decl "_node_t *q);"
Dispatch to one of the above by
.IR op :
.BR SKIP_EQ ", " SKIP_LT ", " SKIP_LTE ", " SKIP_GT ", or " SKIP_GTE .
.TP
.BI "" decl "_node_t *" prefix "skip_head_" decl "(" decl "_t *list);"
.TQ
.BI "" decl "_node_t *" prefix "skip_tail_" decl "(" decl "_t *list);"
First and last user node (excluding sentinels), or
.B NULL
if the list is empty.
.TP
.BI "" decl "_node_t *" prefix "skip_next_node_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, " decl "_node_t *n);"
.TQ
.BI "" decl "_node_t *" prefix "skip_prev_node_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, " decl "_node_t *n);"
Walk to the next or previous node, or
.B NULL
at the ends.  Both are O(1) per step because level 0 is doubly
linked.
.TP
.BI "" decl "_node_t *" prefix "skip_prev_validated_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, " decl "_node_t *n);"
Backward step that validates the (advisory)
.B sle_prev
hint under concurrency, falling back to a forward scan from the
head if the hint is stale.
.TP
.BI "" decl "_node_t **" prefix "skip_to_array_" decl "(" decl "_t *list);"
Heap-allocated, NULL-terminated array of node pointers in
ascending order; element
.B [-1]
holds the length.  Caller frees the array.  Not safe under
concurrent mutation.
.SH "ITERATION MACROS"
.B SKIPLIST_FOREACH_H2T
walks head-to-tail (ascending);
.B SKIPLIST_FOREACH_T2H
walks tail-to-head (descending).  Both expand into
.B for
loops that bind
.B elm
to each node and advance
.B iter
as a counter.  Both unmark pointers before dereferencing, so a
pinned reader may iterate safely while other threads mutate the
list; however the iterator does not provide a coherent
point-in-time view.  Do not insert or remove nodes through the
loop variable during iteration.
.SH "SKIPLIST_DECL_ACCESS"
Generates a higher-level key/value API.  The
.I query_blk
builds a stack query node named
.B query
from a key
.BR k ;
the
.I return_blk
extracts a value from a found
.BR node .
Adds:
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_put_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, " ktype " k, " vtype " v);"
Insert a new key/value pair.  Returns 0, or non-zero (e.g.
.BR EEXIST )
if the key already exists; the rejected node is freed.
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_dup_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, " ktype " k, " vtype " v);"
Insert allowing duplicate keys.
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_set_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, " ktype " k, " vtype " v);"
Update the value of an existing key in place.  Returns
.B ENOENT
if the key is absent.
.TP
.BI "" vtype " " prefix "skip_get_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, " ktype " k);"
Return the value for
.BR k ,
or
.BI ( vtype )0
if absent.
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_contains_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, " ktype " k);"
Return 1 if
.B k
is present, 0 otherwise.
.TP
.BI "" decl "_node_t *" prefix "skip_pos_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, skip_pos_" decl "_t op, " ktype " k);"
Position a cursor relative to
.B k
using
.IR op ,
returning the node or
.B NULL
(never a sentinel).
.SH "SKIPLIST_DECL_SNAPSHOTS"
Adds MVCC point-in-time snapshots.  Mutations made while a
snapshot is active preserve the pre-image of each touched node.
.TP
.BI "void " prefix "skip_snapshots_init_" decl "(" decl "_t *l);"
Enable snapshot support.  Call once before taking snapshots.
.TP
.BI "uint64_t " prefix "skip_snapshot_" decl "(" decl "_t *l);"
Take a snapshot; returns the era identifying it.
.TP
.BI "" decl "_t *" prefix "skip_restore_snapshot_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, size_t era);"
Restore the list to the state at
.BR era ,
discarding later changes.  Returns the list, or
.B NULL
on allocation failure.
.TP
.BI "void " prefix "skip_release_snapshots_" decl "(" decl "_t *l);"
Release all preserved nodes and disable snapshots.
.PP
Snapshots are a single-threaded feature; do not combine them
with concurrent lock-free mutation.
.SH "SKIPLIST_DECL_EBR"
Adds an epoch-based reclamation manager that generates the type
.BI "_skip_ebr_" decl _t.
Incompatible with
.BR SKIPLIST_SINGLE_THREADED .
.TP
.BI "void " prefix "skip_ebr_init_" decl "(_skip_ebr_" decl "_t *e);"
Initialize the EBR state.
.TP
.BI "void " prefix "skip_ebr_attach_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, _skip_ebr_" decl "_t *e);"
Attach EBR to a list so removals defer reclamation.
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_ebr_register_" decl "(_skip_ebr_" decl "_t *e);"
Register the calling thread, returning a
.I tid
(0-based) or
.B -1
if all slots are in use.  Slots freed by
.B skip_ebr_unregister_
are recycled.
.TP
.BI "void " prefix "skip_ebr_unregister_" decl "(_skip_ebr_" decl "_t *e, int tid);"
Release a thread's slot for reuse after its final unpin.
.TP
.BI "void " prefix "skip_ebr_pin_" decl "(_skip_ebr_" decl "_t *e, int tid);"
.TQ
.BI "void " prefix "skip_ebr_unpin_" decl "(_skip_ebr_" decl "_t *e, int tid);"
Bracket each list operation with a pin/unpin pair.  Inside a
pinned region, nodes reachable at pin time stay live.
.TP
.BI "void " prefix "skip_ebr_retire_" decl "(_skip_ebr_" decl "_t *e, " decl "_t *l, " decl "_node_t *n);"
Schedule
.B n
for reclamation once every thread has advanced past the current
epoch.  Called automatically by
.BI prefix skip_remove_node_ decl ()
when EBR is attached.
.TP
.BI "void " prefix "skip_ebr_drain_" decl "(_skip_ebr_" decl "_t *e);"
Force-free all retired nodes.  Call only at shutdown when no
threads are active.
.SH "SKIPLIST_DECL_POOL"
Adds a fixed-capacity slab allocator generating the type
.BI "_skip_pool_" decl _t.
Each slot is claimed by an independent per-slot atomic CAS, so
the allocator has no shared free-list head and is free of the
ABA problem.
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_pool_init_" decl "(_skip_pool_" decl "_t *p, size_t capacity);"
.TQ
.BI "void " prefix "skip_pool_destroy_" decl "(_skip_pool_" decl "_t *p);"
Initialize with
.B capacity
slots (returns 0 or errno) and tear down.
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_pool_alloc_node_" decl "(_skip_pool_" decl "_t *p, " decl "_node_t **out);"
Claim a node into
.BR out ,
returning 0 or
.B ENOMEM
when the pool is exhausted (the caller may then fall back to
.BI prefix skip_alloc_node_ decl ()).
.TP
.BI "void " prefix "skip_pool_free_node_" decl "(_skip_pool_" decl "_t *p, " decl "_t *l, " decl "_node_t *n);"
Run
.I free_blk
then return the node to the pool, or
.BR free (3)
it if it is not from the pool.
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_pool_is_from_" decl "(_skip_pool_" decl "_t *p, " decl "_node_t *n);"
Non-zero if
.B n
belongs to the pool.
.PP
The lower-level
.BI prefix skip_pool_alloc_ decl ()
and
.BI prefix skip_pool_free_ decl ()
operate without running the user free block.
.SH "SKIPLIST_DECL_ARCHIVE"
Adds binary serialization driven by user-supplied per-node
write/read code blocks.  The
.I write_blk
receives a scratch buffer
.B buf
of capacity
.B bufsize
(sized from
.IR sizeof_blk )
and sets
.BR bytes ;
the
.I read_blk
receives the record
.B buf
and its length
.B bytes
and must validate
.B bytes
before reading.  Generates:
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_serialize_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, FILE *fp);"
.TQ
.BI "int " prefix "skip_deserialize_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, FILE *fp);"
Round-trip a list to and from a binary stream (magic
.BR SKPL ,
version, node count, then per-node length-prefixed records).
Returns 0 or an errno.  Records larger than
.B SKIPLIST_ARCHIVE_MAX_RECORD
are rejected.
.SH "SKIPLIST_DECL_VALIDATE"
Adds:
.TP
.BI "int _skip_integrity_check_" decl "(" decl "_t *l, int flags);"
Walk every level checking sortedness, height invariants, and
forward/backward pointer consistency.  Returns the number of
errors found.
.B flags
bit 0 skips concurrent-only checks (marked pointers,
forward-chain-to-tail) for single-threaded use; bit 1 makes it
exit on the first error.  Intended for tests and
.BR SKIPLIST_DIAGNOSTIC
builds, not production hot paths.
.SH "SKIPLIST_DECL_DOT"
Adds GraphViz DOT output.  The node-label callback type is
.BI "skip_sprintf_node_" decl _t,
a
.B "void (*)(" decl "_node_t *, char *)"
that writes a description into a
.B char[2048]
buffer.
.TP
.BI "int " prefix "skip_dot_" decl "(FILE *os, " decl "_t *l, size_t nsg, char *msg, skip_sprintf_node_" decl "_t fn);"
Write one subgraph;
.B nsg
is the subgraph counter (0 for the first list); returns the
next counter.
.TP
.BI "void " prefix "skip_dot_end_" decl "(FILE *os, size_t nsg);"
Finalize the DOT document.  Convert with
.BR dot (1):
.BI "dot -Tpdf out.dot -o out.pdf" .
.SH "COMPILE-TIME FLAGS"
.TP
.B SKIPLIST_SINGLE_THREADED
Replace all C11 atomics with plain loads and stores.  Removes
the
.B <stdatomic.h>
dependency.  Mutually exclusive with
.BR SKIPLIST_DECL_EBR .
.TP
.B SKIPLIST_SPLAY_REBALANCE
Enable adaptive splay rebalancing.  Off by default.
.TP
.B "SKIPLIST_MAX_HEIGHT (default 64)"
Maximum tower height; must be <= 64.
.TP
.B "SKIPLIST_SPLAY_INTERVAL (default 64)"
Operations between rebalance passes.  Must be a power of two.
.TP
.B "SKIPLIST_EBR_MAX_THREADS (default 128)"
Maximum threads that may register with EBR concurrently.
.TP
.B "SKIPLIST_ARCHIVE_MAX_RECORD (default 1<<28)"
Upper bound, in bytes, on a single serialized node record.
Serialize refuses to emit, and deserialize refuses to accept, a
larger record.
.TP
.B SKIPLIST_DIAGNOSTIC
Enable runtime invariant checks inside the implementation.
.TP
.B DEBUG
Enable internal
.BR assert (3)
calls.
.SH "COMPARATOR CONTRACT"
The user-supplied comparison block must implement a strict
total order: deterministic, antisymmetric, and transitive.
Violating any of these can corrupt the structure or trigger a
segmentation fault.  The library does not validate the
comparator at runtime.
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
#include <sl.h>

struct ex_node {
    int   key;
    char *value;
    SKIPLIST_ENTRY(ex) entries;
};

SKIPLIST_DECL(ex, api_, entries,
    /* cmp     */ { (void)list; (void)aux;
                    return (a->key > b->key) - (a->key < b->key); },
    /* free    */ { free(node->value); },
    /* update  */ { (void)value; rc = 0; },
    /* archive */ { (void)dest; (void)src; rc = 0; },
    /* sizeof  */ { (void)node; bytes = sizeof(struct ex_node); });

int main(void) {
    ex_t list;
    api_skip_init_ex(&list);

    ex_node_t *n;
    api_skip_alloc_node_ex(&n);
    n->key = 42;
    n->value = strdup("forty-two");
    api_skip_insert_ex(&list, n);

    api_skip_free_ex(&list);
}
.fi
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
Functions returning
.B int
follow the convention of zero on success and a positive
.BR errno (3)
value on failure.  Functions returning
.BI "" decl "_node_t *"
return
.B NULL
when the requested node is absent or when allocation fails.
.SH "THREAD SAFETY"
By default insert, search, and remove are safe to call
concurrently from multiple threads under EBR pinning, with the
constraint that
.BI prefix skip_free_ decl ()
requires exclusive access.  A removed node is physically
unlinked from every level before it is retired, so epoch-based
reclamation never frees a still-reachable node.  Iteration via
.B SKIPLIST_FOREACH_*
is read-only and safe under EBR pinning, but does not guarantee a
coherent point-in-time view of the whole list; for that use
.BR SKIPLIST_DECL_SNAPSHOTS .
Snapshots, archive, validate, and DOT are single-threaded
features.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR skiplist (7),
.BR pkg-config (1),
.BR pthreads (7),
.BR atomic_load (3),
.BR malloc (3)
.SH AUTHOR
Gregory Burd <greg@burd.me>
.SH LICENSE
Dual-licensed under ISC OR MIT.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
File issues at
.UR https://codeberg.org/gregburd/skiplist/issues
.UE .
